The October 2024 Global Financial Stability Report  highlighted stretched asset valuations, growing financial system leverage, and low financial market volatility against a backdrop of heightened levels of economic uncertainty (Figure ES.1). Such fragilities can amplify shocks and trigger abrupt tightening of financial conditions, exacerbating economic downturns with  potentially sizable additional economic costs. 

A sharp repricing of risk assets followed the series of tariff announcements by the United States since February and accelerated following the April 2 release of plans for larger-than-expected tariffs. Financial market volatility across stock, currency, and bond markets rose markedly. The response by other countries further amplified uncertainties. 

Against the heightened volatility of asset prices, this Global Financial Stability Report assesses that global financial stability risks have increased significantly, primarily due to the tightening of global financial conditions (Figure ES.2). According to the IMF’s Growth-at-Risk model, macrofinancial downside risks to growth have increased meaningfully. 

Our assessment of elevated financial stability risks is also supported by three key forward-looking vulnerabilities. First, despite the recent turmoil in markets, valuations remain high in some key segments of equity and corporate bond markets, meaning that readjustments in valuations could go further if the outlook were to deteriorate. Economic policy uncertainty remains high, and some macroeconomic indicators have surprised to the downside (see the April 2025 World Economic Outlook), making corrections of asset prices more likely.

Downside asset price moves could significantly impact emerging markets. Their currencies and stock prices have already depreciated due to weakening growth prospects. With investors increasingly expecting emerging market central banks to ease, the expected carry trade returns have fallen, raising the likelihood of capital outflows. In frontier economies, although market conditions had been improving, high levels of yields could expose countries to refinancing risks in an environment where sizable amounts of debt are coming due (Figure ES.3). 

Second, some financial institutions could come under strain in volatile markets, especially highly leveraged ones. As the hedge fund and asset management sectors grew, so have their aggregate leverage levels and the nexus with the banking sector from which they borrow (Figure ES.4), raising the specter of weakly managed nonbank financial intermediaries being pushed to deleverage when they face margin calls and redemptions. Some hedge fund strategies have seen a steady increase of leverage recently (Figure ES.5), potentially exacerbating sell-offs, with implications for the broader financial system.

Third, further turbulence could descend upon sovereign bond markets, especially in jurisdictions where government debt levels are high. For instance, popular leveraged cash-futures basis trades in core sovereign bond markets and leveraged carry trades in swap markets could unwind and challenge market liquidity (Figure ES.6). Emerging market economies already facing the highest real financing costs in a decade may now need to refinance their debt and fund fiscal spending at higher costs (see the April 2025 Fiscal Monitor). Overall, investor concerns about public debt sustainability and other fragilities in the financial sector can worsen in a mutually reinforcing fashion.

Heightened policy uncertainty may also impact corporates and households. Global corporate bond spreads have widened recently, reflecting investors’ concerns over adverse impacts of an economic slowdown on corporate earnings in coming quarters. In addition, a decent share of soon-maturing corporate debt carries fixed rates below the prevailing market yield, and an increase in credit spread could challenge the refinancing of weaker firms’ debt. A sharp repricing in equities and other asset prices may impact household balance sheets through wealth effects, particularly as many of them now allocate a larger portion of their financial assets to equities and investment funds than they did before the pandemic. Finally, weaker-than-expected commercial real estate values and still-high interest rates may further complicate loan refinancing efforts, particularly for properties with negative equity.

One main trigger of further sell-offs could be geopolitical risk. Chapter 2 analyzes how major geopolitical risk events, especially military conflicts, can lead to substantial declines in stock prices and increases in sovereign risk premiums, particularly in countries with limited fiscal and international reserve buffers. Geopolitical risk events can also have cross-border spillover effects because of trade or financial linkages.

Policy Recommendations

The policy toolkit for mitigating financial stability risks includes policies for market infrastructures and exchanges that ensure market functioning, the prudential supervision and regulation of financial institutions, and emergency liquidity and crisis resolution tools. Mitigating financial vulnerabilities and preparedness for crisis management are key to containing the potential adverse impact of financial sector developments on macroeconomic outcomes. History has shown time and time again that financial crises entail significant and persistent macro downside costs.

The possibilities of further correction of asset prices amid heightened uncertainty, potential strains impacting highly leveraged financial institutions, and turbulence in core sovereign bond markets elevate financial stability risks. Authorities should prepare to deal with financial instability by ensuring that financial institutions are ready to access central bank liquidity facilities and by being prepared to intervene to address severe liquidity or market function stress, especially in core bond and funding markets. Liquidity can be provided to nonbanks with appropriate guardrails (Chapter 2 of April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report).

To address potential financial stability risks arising from geopolitical risks, financial institutions and their oversight bodies should allocate adequate resources for scenario analysis and stress testing to identify, quantify, and manage geopolitical risks (see Chapter 2). Emerging market and developing economies should continue efforts to deepen financial markets and maintain adequate fiscal policy space and international reserves to cushion against adverse geopolitical shocks.

Given high levels of leverage in the financial system and growing interconnectedness between nonbank financial intermediaries and banks, sufficient levels of capital and liquidity in the banking sector remain the anchor of global financial stability. Full, timely, and consistent implementation of Basel III and other international standards remains key and should be complemented by independent and intensive supervision. The deepening nexus between banks and nonbank financial intermediaries also calls for supervisors to enhance the risk assessment of such linkages.

It is crucial to strengthen policies that mitigate nonbank leverage and other vulnerabilities. Enhanced nonbank reporting requirements could help supervisors develop a systemwide and cross-sectoral perspective of risks and distinguish poorly governed and excessive risk-taking institutions from those that contribute more positively to financial intermediation. 

Elevated economic uncertainty and financial market volatility underscore the need to strengthen the prudential policy frameworks, including micro- and macroprudential approaches. Countries with insufficient buffers should tighten macroprudential tools to increase resilience while avoiding a broad tightening of financial conditions. Where a downturn in activity is leading to financial stress, macroprudential buffers could be released to help banks absorb losses and support the provision of credit to the economy. 

High and rising debt in most countries makes the rebuilding of credibly and growth-friendly buffers imperative. Where opportunities arise, countries should proactively explore liability management operations to manage refinancing risks and reduce or smooth debt servicing profiles. For countries where debt is at risk of becoming unsustainable, early contact with creditors to coordinate an orderly and efficient debt treatment that restores debt sustainability could help avert costly defaults and prolonged loss of market access. 

To address risks from the potential wide adoption of crypto assets, jurisdictions should safeguard monetary sovereignty and strengthen monetary policy frameworks, guard against excessive volatility in capital flows, and adopt unambiguous tax treatment of crypto assets, following the IMF and Financial Stability Board road map for building institutional capacity.

The growing interconnectedness across jurisdictions means that stress emanating from specific jurisdictions can have a global impact, calling for other regions to be prepared. This highlights the crucial role of both multilateral surveillance and the global financial safety net for swift and effective mitigation of financial risks. 